JUDY WOODRUFF, PBS NEWSHOUR
ANCHOR: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN, PBS
NEWSHOUR ANCHOR: And
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
WOODRUFF: On the
"NewsHour" tonight:
Behind the hack.
Still more evidence that
Russian military intelligence
was behind the email breach at
the Democratic National
Committee this year.
SREENIVASAN: Also ahead this
Thursday, the public face
of the Trump presidency.
The RNC's Sean Spicer is tapped
to be press secretary as the
president-elect announces
his communications team.
WOODRUFF: Plus, what to expect
from Washington, D.C.'s new
rules for paid family leave.
Taking on the economic
challenges of having a child.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:
It's really an impossible
choice that families face.
Do I stay here and
hold my baby's hand?
Do I go to work and keep
the roof over our heads?
(END VIDEO CLIP)
SREENIVASAN: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour".
(BREAK)
WOODRUFF: The long, bloody
battle for Syria's largest city
is finally over, with the fall
of Aleppo.
The Syrian army announced
tonight that it is now in full
control of the eastern half
of the city, where rebels
had ruled for four years.
The last rebel fighters and
civilians left Aleppo today,
moving through heavy snow and
wind before the military
declared victory.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
SYRIAN ARMY (through
translator): By virtue
of the pious blood of
our martyrs, we declare
the return of security and
safety to the city of Aleppo.
This is a crushing
blow against the terror
project and its backers.
It is the starting point of a
new phase to drive out terror
from all the lands of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: At least 34,000
people streamed out of
Aleppo since last week.
It marks the biggest victory
of the civil war so far for
President Bashar al-Assad.
SREENIVASAN: In the day's other
news, a memorial ceremony in
Moscow honored Andrey Karlov,
Russia's slain ambassador
to Turkey who was
gunned down on Monday.
The killer shouted slogans
about the plight of Aleppo.
President Vladimir Putin
was among the mourners
who paid respects today
at the Russian foreign
ministry building.
He promised retribution
for Karlov's assassination.
WOODRUFF: Still no sign tonight
of the Tunisian man wanted in
Monday's massacre in Berlin,
Germany.
A manhunt is under way for the
killer who plowed a truck into
a crowded Christmas market,
killing 12.
Rohit Kachroo of
Independent Television
News, reports from Berlin.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
ROHIT KACHROO, INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS: He's in hiding
on his 24th birthday, but Anis
Amri is embarrassing
German intelligence.
Today, we learned they
had intercepted old
messages in which he
offered to become a suicide
bomber.
Police raided homes across
Germany, and yet still no sign.
Attempts to arrest him for a
fourth and perhaps final time
this year have been complicated
by his 36-hour head start.
Though officers did question
several people, four
taken away in Dortmund.
He left his ID card in a
lorry he used as a weapon.
But today, investigators
discovered he left
his DNA there, too.
The interior minister, alongside
Chancellor Merkel said, "The
suspect is with high probability
the perpetrator.
In the driving cabin,
fingerprints were found
and there is additional
evidence that supports
this."
Investigators have traveled
to Tunisia where Anis Amri's
heart-broken family say he must
be innocent.
"If my brother is listening
to me, I want to tell him to
surrender, even for our family.
We will be relieved.
We don't do such things.
Everyone knows our
reputation here."
At the Christmas market
in Berlin, a sort of
normality returned,
except this isn't normal.
Concrete blocks were put up as
the shutters went up for the
first time since Monday night.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: We'll take a closer
look at questions about German
security measures later in the
program.
SREENIVASAN: The U.N.
Security Council has put
off a vote on condemning
Israel's settlement-building,
indefinitely.
Egypt pulled back its proposed
resolution today, after
Israel strongly objected.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu also pressed the
United States to use its
veto.
President-elect Trump spoke with
the Egyptian president today
and issued his own statement,
saying, quote, "Peace
will only come through
direct negotiations.
Not through the imposition of
terms by the United Nations."
WOODRUFF: The president-elect
tweeted today about two
major defense issues as well.
He said the U.S. must
greatly expand its nuclear
weapons capability,
until, in his words, "the
world comes to its senses."
And he asked Boeing for
the price of buying more
F-18 Super Hornet Fighters.
He cited what he called
the "tremendous cost" of
Lockheed Martin's F-35.
Also today, Kellyanne Conway
was named White House counselor,
and Sean Spicer was named
White House press secretary.
We'll return later to the
prospects for press relations
with the Trump White House.
SREENIVASAN: State lawmakers in
North Carolina were back home
today, after an effort to repeal
the so-called "bathroom
law" ended in stalemate.
The law bars legal protections
based on sexual orientation.
And, it requires that
transgender people use
bathrooms conforming
with their sex at birth.
Opponents of the law
are expected to raise
repeal again, next year.
WOODRUFF: Officials in southern
Japan are going to destroy
another 120,000 chickens,
in a spreading
bird flu outbreak.
Today's announcement came just
days after 200,000 birds were
gassed at a farm in northern
Japan.
South Korea has culled 20
million birds since it reported
an outbreak last month.
SREENIVASAN: Just days before
Christmas, it's nearly warm
enough at the North Pole to melt
ice, thanks to a
surge of warm air.
Air temperatures there
were 32 degrees today, when
it's typically 20 below.
Worldwide, this year is set
to be the warmest on record.
The Arctic Region is warming
at twice the global average.
WOODRUFF: And another
sluggish day on Wall Street.
The Dow Jones Industrial
Average lost 23 points
to close below 19,919.
The NASDAQ fell 24 points,
and the S&P 500 slipped four.
SREENIVASAN: Still to come
on the "NewsHour": evidence
the Russian military
hacked the Democratic
Party: as a manhunt continues
across Europe, a look at
Germany's security measures; the
latest on the president-
elect's new team, and much more.
(BREAK)
WOODRUFF: The CIA and other
U.S. intelligence agencies have
concluded the Russian government
was behind the email
hack into the Democratic
National Committee and other
political organizations,
but have yet to produce
their evidence publicly.
President-elect Trump has
questioned that conclusion.
Today, the private cyber
security company that first
uncovered the DNC hack unveiled
new details they claim confirm
Russian military intelligence
service was behind the computer
breach.
Here to explain all of
this is Dmitri Alperovitch.
He's the co- founder of
CrowdStrike, the company
that did the investigating.
And Thomas Rid, he's a professor
at King's College London.
His latest book is "Rise of the
Machines: A Cybernetic History."
And we welcome both of
you to the "NewsHour".
Dmitri Alperovitch,
let me start with you.
What is this new information?
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH, CROWDSTRIKE:
Well, this is an interesting
case we've uncovered actually
all the way in Ukraine
where Ukraine artillerymen
were targeted by the
same hackers who were
called Fancy Bear, that targeted
the DNC, but this time, they
were targeting their cell
phones to understand their
location so that the Russian
military and Russian artillery
forces can actually target
them in the open battle.
WOODRUFF: So, this is Russian
military intelligence who
got hold of information
about the weapons,
in essence, that the Ukrainian
military was using, and was able
to change it through malware?
ALPEROVITCH: Yes, essentially,
one Ukraine officer built
this app for his Android phone
that he gave out to his fellow
officers to control the settings
for the artillery pieces
that they were using, and the
Russians actually hacked that
application, put their malware
in it and that malware
reported back the location of
the person using the phone.
WOODRUFF: And so, what's
the connection between
that and what happened to
the Democratic National
Committee?
ALPEROVITCH: Well, the
interesting is that it
was the same variant
of the same malicious
code that we have
seen at the DNC.
This was a phone version.
What we saw at the DNC
was personal computers,
but essentially, it was
the same source used
by this actor that
we call Fancy Bear.
And when you think about, well,
who would be interested in
targeting Ukraine artillerymen
in eastern Ukraine who
has interest in hacking
the Democratic Party,
Russia government comes
to find, but specifically,
Russian military that would
have operational over forces in
the Ukraine and would
target these artillerymen.
WOODRUFF: So, just quickly,
in the sense, these are
like cyber fingerprints?
Is that what we're
talking about?
ALPEROVITCH: Essentially
the DNA of this malicious
code that matches to
the DNA that we saw at
the DNC.
WOODRUFF: Thomas Rid, to you in
London, as you read about this,
understand this new information,
what do you make of it?
How do you see it?
THOMAS RID, KING'S COLLEGE,
LONDON: Well, the important
piece, I think, is that we're
looking at only one piece in a
larger puzzle which CrowdStrike
has discovered is one piece
of a larger picture.
And the picture is already rich.
We know how they
choose their targets.
We know thousands of
their targets even
by individual names.
We know how they get in, how
they move around, how they take
information out, we know the
infrastructure, the flight
card they used to take
the information out.
And I think we're approaching
the point where the evidence
is so rich that there are only
two reasons not to accept
it -- one, because you don't
understand the technical details
because you don't have
to skills, or because you
don't want to understand
it for political
reasons.
WOODRUFF: Well, you do have
the technical expertise.
Does it hold up for you?
RID: Yes.
You know, what I do is I look
at specific cases and I drill
down and I zoom into the
details of the picture
and look at that detail.
So, we can often link specific
cases like the one that
Dmitri was just describing to
another case because the tool
set that they're using is the
same, really like the tool of
the burglar that breaks into
one building and uses the
same or a comparable tool in
another building.
So, one thing that I'm, for
instance, interested in and that
I focused on is how they broke
into the German parliament and
that we can link that to the
DNC and, indeed, we can also
link those two cases.
So, the evidence is
really strong that we
have at this point.
WOODRUFF: So, the
evidence is really strong.
Are you saying there is just no
doubt about it, at this point?
RID: Among people who
studied the true forensic
evidence, among people
who do incident response,
the vast majority of this
community -- and, you
know, bear in mind this
is an entire profession
trained to do digital
investigations -- most
people in that profession
accept the evidence
that we have.
It's really not controversial
anymore that we're looking
at a major Russian campaign.
You know, keep in mind: this has
been going on for many years.
This particular act, that we
watched them for eight years,
and over the past year, they
made quite a lot of mistakes
which revealed themselves.
WOODRUFF: Now, Dmitri
Alperovitch, we want
to point out and we
said earlier, you were
- - your company was
the one that uncovered
this in the first place.
You were working for the
Democratic National Committee.
Are you still working
-- doing work for them?
ALPEROVITCH: We're protecting
them going forward.
The investigation is closed in
terms of what happened there.
But certainly, we've
seen the campaigns,
political organizations are
continued to be targeted,
and they continue to hire
us and use our technology
to protect themselves.
WOODRUFF: I ask you that
because if there's a question
of conflict of interest, how do
you answer that?
ALPEROVITCH: Well, this
report was not about the DNC.
This report was about
information we uncovered
about what these Russian
actors were doing
in eastern Ukraine in terms
of locating these artillery
units of the Ukrainian army and
then targeting them.
So, what we just did is said
that it looks exactly as the
same to the evidence we've
already uncovered from the
DNC, linking the two together.
WOODRUFF: So, if there's still
someone out there like the
president-elect or others who
support him who say, we just
don't believe this, we don't
think it's been proven, we
haven't seen the CIA and the
FBI's information, what's
your response to that?
ALPEROVITCH: Well, I think it's
legitimate to ask questions
and this is why we wanted
to produce more evidence that
raises the level of confidence
that we have, even internally,
that this is Russian
intelligence agency
called the GRU.
I think it's also important
for the government to
release their own evidence.
And I'm encouraged
that President Obama
ordered this review.
I hope the report that comes
out will be made public so that
everyone can look at it and
make their own judgments.
WOODRUFF: Thomas Rid, what
more would you need to see,
what more a skeptic need to see
in order to erase all doubt?
RID: Of course, we can always
see more evidence and look for
more details, for instance on
specific names of operators,
and we know that, you know, some
intelligence agencies in the
United States seem to
have that information.
But let's keep
something in mind.
What they want to achieve --
what this Russian operation is
trying to achieve at this point
is to drive a wedge between
the president-elect, between
the next administration
and the intelligence
community.
And so far, if you see that as
part of the operation, they have
been spectacularly successful.
So, releasing more evidence and
then having critics possibly
even the president-elect
say, well, that's not good
enough, that is exactly the
outcome that they want because
it introduces friction
inside the security
establishment in Washington.
WOODRUFF: Just quickly.
Dmitri, is that what
you see as well?
ALPEROVITCH: I think
it's important to
bring out the evidence.
Some people legitimately
have questions about this.
It's important for the U.S.
government to tell us what they
know because they have access
to classified intelligence and
sourcing methods that we are not
privy to as a private security
company.
So, I think it's important to
know what happened in the most
consequential hack we've ever
seen.
WOODRUFF: And, of course,
we have no way of knowing if
that's what they will do -- what
they will do.
But, of course, we will continue
to watch it very closely, as
well you Dmitri Alperovitch,
Professor Thomas Rid.
We thank you both.
ALPEROVITCH: Thank you.
(BREAK)
SREENIVASAN: Anis Amri, the
man suspected of carrying out
Monday's attack on a Berlin
Christmas market, was well
known to German authorities.
He was under surveillance
for six months this year and
was slated for deportation.
But his home country of
Tunisia refused to accept him.
Joining me now for more on how
Amri allegedly was allowed to
pull off this attack is Peter
Neumann, founder and director
of the International Center for
the Study of Radicalization and
Political Violence.
He joins us tonight from Munich.
What's the latest in
the investigation?
PETER NEUMANN, INTERNATIONAL
CENTER FOR THE STUDY
OF RADICALIZATION AND
POLITICAL VIOLENCE:
Well, the latest is that they
are still trying to track down
where exactly he is right now,
and they are conducting raids
on different places that are
connected to the jihadist
scene.
It is now known that he was
part of a wider network of
jihadists in Germany, and they
are raiding different places
that they seem to be believing
that they are connected to
the scene.
SREENIVASAN: Tell me, how is it
possible the German authorities
not just had this person
on the radar but were
scheduling him for deportation?
How did it get this far?
How did they miss the signs?
NEUMANN: So, there are
a couple of things.
The first thing is capacity.
There are around 550 jihadists
in Germany who are believed
to be potential terrorists.
In order to surveil a single
person 24 hours a day, you
need about 20 officials.
It's not possible.
And so, you know, authorities
need to make judgment calls
all the time -- who do they
consider to be acutely
dangerous and who do they
consider to be less dangerous.
And this one may have
fallen through the net.
The second point is federalism.
Police and intelligence
services are essentially
on a state-by-state basis.
And this guy traveled
from a lot of different
states to different
states, and some of the
information may have slipped
through the cracks there.
SREENIVASAN: What about the
possibility he was radicalized
in an Italian prison?
That's something one of
his brothers had said.
NEUMANN: Yes, he was in an
Italian prison about four
years, and it may well be that
he was radicalized there.
He went further up north
to Germany afterwards.
He shouldn't have been able to
do that because he was claiming
asylum in Germany, and coming
from Italy, that claim should
have been refused immediately.
And so, basically, the
whole system has failed.
And I think it's all down to
the fact that Germany is not
really used to being the target
of terrorist attacks.
It's a little bit like
America before 9/11.
Germans are quite naive
still about terrorism.
We haven't been confronted with
the kind of terrorist attacks
other countries have been
confronted with, and the whole
system has not been geared
up to confront this kind of
threat.
SREENIVASAN: Now, post-9/11,
the American system geared
up, to use your phrase.
I mean, how does Germany's
sensitive history with the
surveillance state play into all
of this?
NEUMANN: That's a very good
point because ultimately, after
the end of the Second World
War, Germans before reeducated
to be against surveillance
and to be pacifists.
And guess what?
America and the ally succeeded.
Germans by and large
are against surveillance
and they are pacifists.
And that means that when being
confronted with this kind of
threat, a lot of reactions
by politicians but also by
society are very much against
kind of confronting this threat
head on.
I very much hope that after
this incident, the pendulum
doesn't swing entirely the other
way, but that we are able to
have a reasonable debate about
what kind of measures are really
necessary to confront
this rather than staying
one side or the other.
SREENIVASAN: Do you see changes
happening now in the interest
of public safety that's
swinging the pendulum?
NEUMANN: I think there is
a lot of debate right now.
A lot of people are very
unhappy with how the authorities
have dealt with this case.
There is a sense of
real outrage, and there
is a sense that the
system isn't working and
that we really need to think
about how to make this work.
And I believe it's necessary
to basically have something
like the 9/11 Commission that
you had in America after 9/11
that basically goes through
I've aspect of government policy
and says, this works,
this doesn't work, and
how do we construct a
comprehensive counterterrorism
strategy?
We don't have that
in Germany right now.
We don't have a
counterterrorism strategy.
We have a lot of authorities
working on different things.
We need a comprehensive thing,
and I hope that's what's
going to come out of this.
SREENIVASAN: All right.
Peter Neumann -- thanks
so much for joining us.
NEUMANN: Thank you.
WOODRUFF: President-elect Donald
Trump continued to round out his
White House team today, tapping
two of his key campaign advisers
to senior West Wing positions.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: She's been one of
Donald Trump's most visible
advisers since taking over as
campaign manager last summer.
Today, the president-elect
named Kellyanne Conway to
be White House counselor.
He followed that with word
that Sean Spicer will serve as
White House press secretary.
Spicer had been communications
director for the Republican
National Committee for five
years.
Last month, he moved over
to become chief spokesman
for the Trump transition.
Now, Spicer, along with Jason
Miller and Hope Hicks, will
handle relations with the news
media, and that could
be a tall order.
DONALD TRUMP (R),
PRESIDENT-ELECT: The
people back there, the
extremely dishonest press.
WOODRUFF: As candidate and
president-elect, Mr. Trump has
called out reporters in general,
and at times, by name,
like NBC's Katy Tur.
TRUMP: They're not reporting it.
Katy, you're not
reporting it, Katy.
WOODRUFF: Last month, he
retweeted attacks on CNN's Jeff
Zeleny, after the correspondent
reported on Mr.
Trump's unsubstantiated
claims of voter fraud.
And during the campaign, the
Trump team at times barred "The
Washington Post," Univision,
"Politico" and "BuzzFeed"
from its rallies.
Reince Priebus, the incoming
chief of staff, is signaling
changes could be ahead for the
White House press corps.
REINCE PRIEBUS, INCOMING WHITE
HOUSE CHIEF OF STAFF: Even
looking at things like the
daily -- you know, the daily
White House briefing from the
press secretary, I mean, there's
a lot of different ways that
things can be done, and I
can assure you, we're looking
at that.
WOODRUFF: Still, Kellyanne
Conway promised today there
will be plenty of access.
KELLYANNE CONWAY, INCOMING WHITE
HOUSE COUNSELOR: You will have a
great deal of press availability
on a daily basis, and you'll
have a president who continues
to be engaged with the press.
WOODRUFF: The president-elect
has met with reporters off-the-
record since the election.
He has not held a news
conference since late July.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: For more, we're
joined now by Brian Stelter.
He's senior media
correspondent for CNN.
And Jeff Mason, he's a
White House correspondent
for "Reuters", and
he's president of the
White House Correspondents
Association.
Welcome to both of you.
Jeff Mason, to you first.
Based on what you've seen of
Donald Trump so far, both the
campaign and the transition,
what do you expect from him when
it comes to press relations?
JEFF MASON, REUTERS: Well,
Judy, we're sort of going
to wait and see right now.
We're pleased to see and we
congratulate the new members of
Donald Trump's press team going
into the White House and we look
forward to working with them.
Certainly, there have been
some challenges between the
media and the Trump team during
his campaign, but we've
made a lot of progress
during transition in
working on that relationship
and setting up a protective
pool, for example.
So, I am cautiously optimistic
that we will continue to make
that progress once they're
in the White House.
WOODRUFF: Brian Stelter, we
know there has been attention
on some difficulties between
the Trump team and
the news media.
Do you think it's been
very different from other
presidential nominees
and people who've
run for president and
people who've served
in the White House?
BRIAN STELTER, CNN: On the
surface, actually, there are
a lot of similarities, right?
The transitions having
daily conference calls
with reporters, it is
putting out press releases.
Donald Trump has given
a couple of interviews.
He, of course, has not held
a press conference in many
months, but he's given a couple
of interviews.
I would say, on the surface
however, Donald Trump continues
to wage an anti-media war,
a campaign against the press by
complaining about the dishonesty
of journalists, by attacking
individual journalists and
institutions on Twitter.
He's doing exactly the same
sorts of things he was doing
during his presidential campaign
and this reasonably, they'll
continue to do that when
he's in the White House.
You know, he told me in June,
he would not be black listing
reporters from the White
House press briefing
room, for example.
He has indicated he will
make some changes once he's
actually in the Oval Office.
But this anti-media
campaign, I think we should
expect it to continue.
WOODRUFF: How worried --
how concerned are you,
Jeff Mason, about that?
MASON: I mean, I'll call
it cautious optimism.
We're not naive about the
challenges that the press corps
faces, but I base it on the
fact that we've made a lot
of progress just in the last
several weeks since the election
on setting up a protective
pool, for example.
You may remember shortly after
the election, President-elect
Trump came to Washington without
a pool of journalists.
WOODRUFF: Right.
MASON: He went out for
dinner one night in New
York without a pool.
Since then, we've
got a pool in place.
It's not perfect.
It's not on his plane, for
example, but we expect that to
change once he's on Air Force
One and we expect a full White
House protective pool to be
in place once he's in office.
WOODRUFF: Brian Stelter,
certainly, the three
of us understand this
being part of the news
media, but for the public
watching, why -- what
are they to believe
about what a president's
real obligation is to the press?
Why shouldn't a president
feel free to do whatever he
wants, talk over the heads of
the press, if he wants to?
STELTER: Yes, we should do
a better job as an industry
explaining how press freedom is
your freedom.
It's the freedom of the viewers
watching this program, that
we are only there at the White
House working for them.
And I know sometimes there is a
disconnect, a grave disconnect,
and we need to work to
reestablish that connection.
You know, we're not in
the business of making
assumptions, right?
We should not be assuming the
worst about a Trump presidency
nor should we be assuming
the best.
Journalists should
not make assumptions.
But journalism lawyers,
journalism advocates
do have a sense of what
the worst-case scenarios
are here.
It doesn't mean blacklisting
reporters from the White House
press briefing, which the
new press secretary Sean Spicer
says will not happen, which
Trump said will not happen.
It could be IRS tax
audits of journalists.
It could be revoking
FCC licenses.
It could be defunding
public media.
It could be using the Espionage
Act against journalists to
prosecute them for investigative
reporting.
These are all things that are
feasible, that are possible.
I'm not saying it's going to
a happen, but certainly, First
Amendment lawyers are focusing
on these issues now, preparing
for worst-case scenarios with
Trump, given how anti-media
he has been during the campaign.
WOODRUFF: Jeff Mason, how
would you describe what the
president's obligation is to the
news media?
I mean, the First Amendment
talks about don't do anything
to abridge freedom of the press,
but what does that
really mean today?
MASON: Well, certainly, the
way we view that is making it
possible for reporters to do
their jobs, and that means
having access to the president
himself, it means having access
to his staff and not only
his communications staff, but
also other senior advisors.
And that's something that the
White House Correspondents
Association will continue to
press for and, honestly, you
know, Judy, that's an issue we
have been pushing for with every
president, and there is always
a little bit of tension there.
Regardless of what party the
president comes from, there
is always going to be a little
bit of a tense relationship
between the press and
the administration,
and we anticipate
that.
But we, to answer your question,
certainly expect that upholding
the rights and the freedoms
that are guaranteed by the
Constitution in that First
Amendment include allowing the
press to do its job.
WOODRUFF: Brian Stelter,
what does Donald - - the
president-elect's choice
of these individuals
to be in the press
operation, his press
secretary, Sean Spicer, the
others he's named in the
communications office, what
does that tell you about
what his approach will be?
Other presidents have sometimes
gone to a former journalist --
STELTER: There is talk
about a FOX News host,
for example, as press
secretary or Laura Ingraham,
the conservative
talk radio host.
Instead, he's going with
a veteran of Washington,
Sean Spicer, well known
in the press corps.
He is someone who will reply
to emails, who will respond,
he can also be combative.
And certainly, Donald
Trump would embrace
that about Sean Spicer.
But he is going with someone
who's a veteran, who knows D.C.
But I think we should make no
mistake about this, I respect
Jeff's cautious optimism.
But Donald Trump is different
from what we've seen in
modern times from presidents.
The indications that we've
gotten and we've received over
the 18 months of his campaign
is that he will restrict access,
he will attack and ridicule the
press, and he will say things
that are flatly untrue when it's
very obvious things are untrue.
WOODRUFF: Let me ask you
about these tweets today
from the president-elect.
Just late this afternoon,
he tweeted, quote,
"Based on the tremendous
cost and cost overruns
of the Lockheed Martin F-35,"
which is a fighter jet, he
said, "I've asked Boeing to cost
out a comparable
F-18 Super Hornet."
So, Jeff Mason, when you look
at this, when you look at
the tweet earlier today where
he talks about the need for
the United States to beef up
its nuclear capabilities, what
does this say in terms of the
news media and its ability
to, frankly, keep up with what
this president is trying
to do, this president-elect
is trying to do?
MASON: Well, it is certainly
the case that previous White
Houses, especially the Obama
White House with the age of
social media, have used Twitter
and other bits of social
media to get their message out.
But President-elect Donald
Trump has taken that to a whole
new level, and you're right
to say, how will the
media adjust to that?
So far, it's been an adjustment
in terms of just reporting
out those tweets when they
come, and I think Brian was
right, too, when he talked about
fact checking, and sometimes
certainly the president-elect
has tweeted things that are
not correct and the media
has for the most part tried
to do its job of saying
when that is the case.
But it is a challenge and
something that I think reporters
and news organizations will
be grappling with not just
during the transition but in the
months to come once he's working
from the White House.
WOODRUFF: And Brian --
STELTER: In the fall, he said
he was going to be restrained
with Twitter once in the
Oval Office.
But we haven't seen that
in this transition period.
If anything, we've seen Donald
Trump, the same person he was
in the 1980s, doing deals,
doing business in New
York city, now doing
it on the global stage.
You know, Judy, this contract
for the F-35 was done years ago,
of course, with the Pentagon
and Lockheed Martin.
It's going to take days to
decipher what he's trying to say
on Twitter, but trying to create
the sense of a bidding war.
I mean, this is exactly what
his voters wanted to see crump
do and he's using Twitter in
an entirely new way to do it.
And, by the way, you
know, Sean Spicer, the
new press secretary,
says this will continue
once Trump is in
the White House.
We'll see about that idea
that he's going to be more
restrained once he's in charge.
WOODRUFF: Brian Stelter,
Jeff Mason, thank you.
STELTER: Thanks.
SREENIVASAN: This week,
Washington, D.C. passed
one of the most generous
paid family leave
laws in the country.
The district now joins
California, Rhode Island,
New Jersey and New York
in approving similar
measures.
Our economics correspondent
Paul Solman has the story.
It's part of our weekly series,
"Making Sense," which airs
Thursdays on the "NewsHour".
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
PAUL SOLMAN, PBS NEWSHOUR
ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT:
Diana Alvord feels
lucky -- lucky that her
daughter was born in September
without complication,
lucky that she came
home just days after she
was born, because four years
ago, Alvord's son was born,
prematurely, at just 24 weeks.
DIANA ALVORD: We
wondered for weeks and
weeks if he would live.
SOLMAN: Alvord, who kept
vigil over him in the neonatal
intensive care unit for months,
also wondered how either of
them could have endured the
trial if she hadn't worked for
an accommodating non-profit
in Washington, D.C.
ALVORD: I was given the
opportunity to just take a leave
of absence, and so, I was one
of the few, probably, who
could return to their jobs
at the end of our ordeal.
But, I know.
SOLMAN: Unpaid, unpaid leave?
ALVORD: Unpaid leave.
But I know that there are
many people, that isn't
a choice that they have.
And most people have
to go back to work.
And it's really, an impossible
choice that families face.
Do I stay here and
hold my baby's hand?
Do I go to work and keep
the roof over our heads?
How do you put a price on
whether you stay or go?
SOLMAN: Many can't afford
to take unpaid leave.
Yet, just thirteen percent
of American private sector
workers get any paid leave.
Alvord has seen the results.
ALVORD: When I sat at his
bedside in the NICU, very,
very often, I was alone.
Very often, I would look around
the room and there would be 20
babies in all their separate
isolettes, and there weren't 20
sets of caregivers around them.
SOLMAN: The U.S. is the only
industrialized country that
does not mandate any paid family
leave, giving the responsibility
to states and cities, like
the District of Columbia.
In D.C., supporters
lobbied for a paid leave
law for more than a year.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: This is an
urgent thing for me personally.
SOLMAN: But businesses and
the mayor balked at the cost.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:
Councilmember Silverman.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Yes.
SOLMAN: Despite the backlash,
though, this week, D.C.'s city
council passed a scaled-back
version of the bill.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE:
The measure passes.
(CHEERS)
SOLMAN: This means D.C. parents
who work in the private sector
can now take eight weeks
off at up to 90 percent of
their pay, funded by a roughly
half-a-percent payroll tax on
all non-government employers.
And that, says Heather Boushey,
who studies work-life balance,
will be good for the local
economy.
HEATHER BOUSHEY, WASHINGTON
CENTER FOR EQUITABLE
GROWTH: It boosts our
labor supply, especially
among women and people who
have care responsibilities,
it increases job retention
for people, people
are more likely to keep their
job when they actually have
the tools to actually make it
possible to balance all of
these competing challenges
in their daily life.
And all of that means
the economy is able to
tap into that talent.
SOLMAN: True, says Georgetown
University economist
Harry Holzer, but --
HARRY HOLZER, GEORGETOWN
UNIVERSITY ECONOMIST:
There is a strong need
to balance the benefits
that workers and their families
get from paid family leave
with the costs on employers.
SOLMAN: Holzer worries
the D.C. plan will
hobble local businesses.
HOLZER: They're providing 90
percent wage replacement up
to close to $1,000 a week.
You're giving the worker almost
no incentive to limit the
amount of time they ask for.
Other states that have
done this provide 60
percent, maybe 70 percent.
SOLMAN: But what would
an employer do if it
was too expensive --
the cost was too high?
HOLZER: So, employers
can be quite ingenious
in terms of figuring
out ways to get the work
done with fewer workers.
Another possibility is that
employers simply might move
across the river to Arlington,
Virginia.
Keep in mind that in the state
of Virginia, no one is required
to provide paid leave to
employees.
SOLMAN: But D.C.
restaurant operator Greg
Casten now will be.
So, will he skip town?
GREG CASTEN, RESTAURANT
OPERATOR: You can't just pick
up a restaurant and move it over
the state line to avoid
the tax because restaurants
are, you know, the three
most important things:
location, location, and,
of course, location.
SOLMAN: Casten, who also co-owns
a seafood supply company,
complains the D.C. government
already imposes a host of
costs on businesses, including
a recent minimum wage hike.
CASTEN: This just gives an idea
of how many different laws an
employer has to put up with.
I'm not saying any of
them on the face are bad.
All I'm saying is,
there's a lot, a lot.
SOLMAN: Casten insists most
employers will ultimately pass
on the cost to the employees
themselves.
SOLMAN: But not every employer.
ROGER HOROWITZ, EMPLOYER: For
us, it just really would be
extremely helpful as a way
to retain good employees.
SOLMAN: Roger Horowitz
is the co-owner of
Pleasant Pops, purveyor
of popsicles and coffee.
A major labor cost?
Employee turnover.
HOROWITZ: Between $2,000 and
$3,000 is how much it costs us
every time an employee leaves,
to train someone and
to fill their position.
SOLMAN: That's more than the
$2,000 Horowitz estimates the
new family leave tax will cost
him.
HOROWITZ: We have an employee
who will in three months
and will not be able to, you
know, have paid leave because
we don't have the financial
resources to make that happen
right now.
SOLMAN: So, key for you
is that this functions
as an insurance policy?
HOROWITZ: Absolutely.
Being part of a larger pool
and working with all the other
small businesses and having
all that money be administered
by the city would be
very helpful for us.
SOLMAN: So Pleasant Pops pays
a small tax into the pool,
like all the other firms in
the city.
And in return, it's insured,
so it can draw from the pool to
cover its costs if its employees
need family leave.
But economist Holzer
worries other firms
will be discouraged from
employing low-income workers
if they think those
workers would be the most
likely to take paid leave.
HOLZER: They could simply cut
back on less educated young
women in the childbearing age
and just replace them
with other employees.
They would presumably try to
hire employees who would take
less leave.
SOLMAN: But restaurant server
Shanae Bond illustrates just
how vulnerable workers are
as things currently stand.
While pregnant with her daughter
Zane, Bond's employer axed her.
SHANAE BOND: I believe I
was taken off the schedule
because I was pregnant.
I think that it was just
easier to accommodate other
servers wanting more hours.
SOLMAN: Out of work, Bond has
gotten by only because her
father moved in and helps with
the bills.
DANTE CHURCH: She's
always held down a job.
She's always paid
her bills on time.
She never really had to ask
me or her mother for any help,
you know, until, you know, this
pregnancy and I know it was
hard for her to come to me.
SOLMAN: As for Diana
Alvord, that dangerously
premature baby is now this
fellow -- an imaginative
four year old.
Alvord says the early days she
spent at her son's side were
critical to his development.
ALVORD: Children's
outcomes are better if
they have skin-to-skin
contact, it's called
kangaroo care, you do it in
the NICU, and it's shown to
lower babies' stress hormones,
it's shown to regulate
their heart rate, they
are able to regulate
their own body temperature
sooner, their breathing
is more regular.
And the economic argument part
of it comes in when you think
about the services and the
care that the city
would otherwise provide
to these families and
these children later
on down the pipeline, rather
than investing right at the
first moment where you can make
a greater impact from day one.
What were you doing
with the Legos?
UNIDENTIFIED KID:
Making (INAUDIBLE)
SOLMAN: Oh, you made
another rocket ship.
And just look how
far her son has come.
ALVORD: We were told that it
was in the single digits that
he would even come out of his
birth surgery without incredible
complications like cerebral
palsy and all sorts of things.
I mean, we were lucky, maybe.
Or, or maybe we did all
the things that there
are out there to do.
SOLMAN: Things more
Washingtonians will now
be able to do, because
of paid family leave.
In Washington, D.C.,
this is economics
correspondent Paul Solman.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: For many years,
most businesses were closed
on Sundays in the U.S.
But for many decades,
shopping on Sundays has
become the norm here.
However, in Greece, it remains
a major point of contention,
pitting religious tradition
against recent
economic realities.
Special correspondent
Malcolm Brabant reports.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
MALCOLM BRABANT, PBS NEWSHOUR
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT:
In Piraeus, Greece's main
port city, the churches
are filled to bursting
point as orthodox Christians
maintain traditions handed
down the generations.
Here, Sundays are for
devotions to the saints,
not for worshipping at
the altar of profit.
The city's bishop has condemned
Sunday shopping as an act
of war with the church.
But in Saint Evangalistra
Church, Father Yiorgios
Yiorgakopoulos is more measured.
YIORGIOS YIORGAKOPOULOS,
SAINT EVANGALISTRA
CHURCH (translated):
We are of the opinion
from a religious point of
view that the sixth day
of the week is provided
to man for communication
with God but also that attempts
are being made to get rid
of what we know as normal
life.
To try and turn us into robots
and machines by making all
the days the same, every day
a working day -- all
days without meaning.
BRABANT: And this is the
heart of Piraeus' shopping
district on a Sunday morning.
Everything is firmly shuttered.
But the International Monetary
Fund believes it's time for
this particular trade barrier
to be lifted.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Liberalizing
the trade market will allow for
small and medium enterprises
to get an advantage in
the market by allowing
them to open on Sundays.
BRABANT: One man who'd like to
use a sharp implement on what he
regards as Greece's restrictive
trading practices is Notis
Mitarakis, a conservative
opposition politician who
used to be a development
minister.
NOTIS MITARAKIS, CONSERVATIVE
LAWMAKER: Allowing people the
right to work is a fundamental
right in our system of economy.
In order to get out of the
crisis, the key parameter is
to increase production, is to
increase GDP.
And anything that can help to
that direction, anything that
allows people who are willing
and able to work, to
get out and get into
the market, is positive.
BRABANT: This mall is
a compelling memorial
to the corpse that
is the Greek economy.
It's on Stadiou Street,
once Athens most expensive
shopping thoroughfare.
It was never exactly Fifth
Avenue, but before the crisis
it was throbbing and thriving.
Greece's mom and pop businesses
have really taken a battering
during this seven-year-long
financial crisis.
In all, a quarter of a
million small and medium
sized enterprises have
closed down, throwing
half a million people onto
the streets and into the
vast army of the unemployed.
Despite vigorous oppositions
from trades unions and
the church, shopkeepers
were given permission
to open for a handful of
Sundays each year at special
times like Christmas.
But according to
business leaders, this
has made absolutely no
difference at all to the
level of trading.
In its heyday, store owners
would pay up to $1,500 a square
feet for retail space on Stadiou
Street.
In amongst the boarded up
shells of former businesses on
Stadiou, Andreas Papagiogiou
is clinging on, just for the
sake of his 35-year-old son
who will inherit the shop.
Papagiogiou has been here for
40 years and on the day we
met, he had sold goods worth
just 60 dollars.
ANDREAS PAPAGIOGIOU,
STORE OWNER (translated):
Opening on a Sunday so
far has benefited nobody.
We're making a loss.
We can't afford to bring in
the staff because we can't
pay them a Sunday rate.
BRABANT: This is Ermou, now
Athens main retail street, on a
Sunday before Christmas, which
explains the large crowds.
But many of them were
just window shopping.
People weren't over laden
with Christmas goodies.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: The Sunday
opening, of course, is creating
more, let's say, expenses
to the companies because they
have to pay 75 percent more
to their employees for the
Sunday working compared
to the other working days.
Therefore for the small sized
companies, this is something
that they cannot afford.
BRABANT: Vassilis Korkidis
is the head of the country's
Small Business Federation.
Korkidis claims that Sunday
trading would only benefit
multinational corporations and
outlets like Athens main
mall, which he says can afford
premium wages on a Sunday.
VASSILIS, KORKIDIS, PRESIDENT,
SMALL BUSINESS FEDERATION:
The life of a small and medium
sized entrepreneur
is a nightmare.
He has to live every day
in order to pay taxes.
We pay almost 65 percent
of our turnover for taxes.
The 35 percent left is not
enough actually to run a
business for your family to live
and to buy growth.
BRABANT: Greece's plight was
high on President Obama's list
of priorities when he visited
Athens just after the election.
He made it clear that
Greeks deserves a break.
BARACK OBAMA, PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES: In order to make
reforms sustainable the Greek
economy needs the space
to return to growth and
start creating jobs again.
The IMF has said that
debt relief is crucial.
I will continue to urge
creditors to take the
steps needed to put
Greece on a path towards
a durable economic recovery
because it's in all of our
interests that Greece succeeds.
BRABANT: Greece's beleaguered
prime minister, Alexis Tsipras,
has angered the country's
creditors by repeatedly
reneging on promises.
ALEXIS TSIPRAS, PRIME MINISTER,
GREECE (through translator): The
Greek economy and our society,
after seven whole years,
cannot take any more austerity.
BRABANT: But the European Union,
which has provided most of
Greece's bail out cash ignored
the U.S. president.
Analyst Nick Malkoutzis
believes that any recovery will
be further delayed while the
IMF and European Union disagree
over what is the next step.
NICK MALKOUTZIS, ANALYST: The
Europeans are reluctant to
provide the debt relief that
Greece needs because
of political reasons.
The IMF is reluctant to back
down on what it sees as the
structural side which it thinks
is very important
moving forward.
There's wrong and
right on both sides.
The problem is Greece is
caught between the two.
The finance minister likened it
to be being trapped between two
elephants that were fighting
and that's the reality
for Greece at the moment.
BRABANT: The financial
crisis may mean hardship
that will last a generation.
But at St. Evangelistra's
Church, theologian Ilias Liamis
was resolute over the issue of
Sunday trading.
ILIAS LIAMIS, THEOLOGIAN
(through translator): This is an
attempt to eradicate the better
things in life -- the joy of
meeting up with a friend ,the
joy of having a day when your
mind will not be occupied solely
with numbers, cash and consumer
goods, the concept of having
a day to relax and
rest one's soul.
This concept seems to be
considered as something
that should no longer exist.
The important thing here is
that this is a challenge urging
us to change the way we think.
YIORGAKOPOULOS (through
translator): The crisis is
basically a spiritual one.
People themselves decide how
they will live their lives, just
as those older than us lived
with less and were happy.
So will we learn to live with
less money and still be happy.
BRABANT: This woman is
unburdening her troubles
to Saint Spyridon.
Elsewhere millions of Greeks
are crying silent tears of anger
at what they perceive as the
injustice of a never
ending financial crisis.
For the "PBS NewsHour", I'm
Malcolm Brabant in Athens.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
SREENIVASAN: Finally tonight,
an author channeling his inner
child through graphic novels.
Jeffrey Brown sits down with
Gene Luen Yang, one of this
year's MacArthur Genius Award
winners.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
GENE LUEN YANG, AMBASSADOR
FOR YOUNG PEOPLE'S LITERATURE:
I'm super excited to be here
with you.
My name is gene.
JEFFREY BROWN, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT: Gene Luen Yang
can seem like one of the kids
himself.
YANG: This is what I
look like in real life.
That is what I look like as
a cartoon and this morning,
what I'm going to do is I'm
going to share with you
about two things that I love.
BROWN: Sharing things he loves
is now part of his official job
description, as the national
ambassador for Young People's
Literature, an honor given
him by the Library of Congress
earlier this year.
And the two things he loves?
Comic books and coding.
We spoke recently as he
visited Stonewall Middle
School in Manassas, Virginia.
YANG: I think
they're so related.
Coding and writing stories,
I really feel like I use the
same parts of my brain to do
both, right?
When you're making a comic what
you do if you take a fairly
complex storyline, and you
have to break it up
into individual panels.
And coding is very
much the same way.
You take a complex concept
and you break it up
into individual lines.
So, it's all about taking the
complex and breaking it into
simple, understandable pieces.
BROWN: I don't think everybody
thinks of it that way, thinks
of the connection between
writing and coding.
YANG: I think there is a
tendency in modern American
culture to separate the sciences
from the arts, and to
me it just feels like
such a false dichotomy.
You know, there are
so many people who are
interested in both.
There are so many people
pursuing both and who want
to become good at both.
BROWN: Yang began drawing as
a young child and creating
comics and graphic novels by
fifth grade.
The son of Chinese immigrants,
he grew up in California,
majoring in computer science
at U.C.
Berkeley with a minor
in creative writing.
He taught computer science at
an Oakland, California high
school for 17 years before
turning to full-time writing.
In 2006, his "American
Born Chinese" became
the first graphic novel
to be nominated for
a National Book Award.
And the two-volume
"Boxers and Saints,"
about the boxer rebellion
in China, also received
a nomination, in 2013.
What is it about comics,
or graphic novels,
that somehow works?
Because not everybody
gets it, right?
YANG: Yes, yes, yes.
For me, I love the combination
of the visual with the text.
And as a reader, I just
think that the interplay
between pictures and
words can be so complex.
You know, like in the hands of
a really good cartoonist, you
can get some really amazing
things out.
BROWN: I see you with the kids
and you play up their kind
of insecurities that you had,
right, you're very
upfront about that.
YANG: Yes.
BROWN: "I'm a nerd, I
was this, I was that."
Why?
YANG: Well, first,
because it's true!
I think, this is what I realized
as an adult, as somebody who
has been doing comics for
almost 20 years now, that
self-doubt just never goes away.
It's constantly with you and
I think that's true for maybe
not every creator but almost
every creator.
Getting over that self doubt
is huge and to realize that
even adults have those issues,
I think it's important.
BROWN: He's been an advocate
for diversifying the faces and
stories of graphic novels --
YANG: Are you Chinese?
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:
Yes, I'm from Shanghai.
BROWN: -- and made the
Chinese-American experience
one of his main subjects.
YANG: Growing up, I did go
through a period when I really
struggled with my own ethnic
heritage.
I remember being in
late elementary school
and junior high and
realizing that who I was,
the culture that I came
from made me different from
most of the kids around me.
And you get -- like I think
every kid goes through this
period where you want to excise
all the stuff that
makes you different.
It took me a really long time
to come to a place where I
felt like I accepted myself
as a Chinese-American.
And a lot of my work is about
that, is about how you can build
an identity out of two pieces
that don't always
easily fit together.
BROWN: Just connected with
the students, his avid
readers, on this visit.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: You can
be an outsider to different
situation like different cliques
and groups and sometimes
it feels like that in life.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: I
know about like binary
numbers before, and it
was cool how he showed
us like the 1,100 could
be like 12, I was like,
whoa, that is so cool.
YANG: Reading is a great
way of exploring the world.
Every ambassador
picked a platform.
The platform that I chose
was "reading without
walls", and by that, I
mean just getting outside
your own comfort
zones through books.
One of the best things about
books is that it gives you a
window into somebody else's
mind, into somebody else's soul.
So, I'm challenging kids to
read books about people who
aren't like them, who don't look
like them or live like them.
Number two, read books
about subject matter they
might find intimidating.
And, number three, read books
in different sorts of formats.
So, if you've never read a
graphic novel, you've never
read a book in verse or even
a chapter book, I want
you to give it a try.
So, what I'm going to do now
is show you what logo looks
like on a modern computer.
BROWN: Even while taking on
his duties as an ambassador for
reading, Gene Yang continues
to work on a variety of
projects, including a graphic
novel version of the television
show, "Avatar: The Last
Airbender", and a D.C.
comics' new series about
a Chinese Superman.
Coming up: a nonfiction graphic
novel about race and sports.
From Manassas, Virginia,
I'm Jeffrey Brown for
the "PBS NewsHour".
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: And a news update:
police in Melbourne, Australia,
have arrested seven suspects who
allegedly planned a series of
Christmas Day bomb attacks.
Officials said they were
inspired by the Islamic
State group, and were
set to attack three
major sites.
On the "NewsHour" online,
"Passengers" is a new space
thriller film based in part on
real mental health issues
experienced by astronauts.
So, how real is the movie plot?
You can find a review
from our science team, but
beware, it contains spoilers.
All that and more is
at PBS.org/NewsHour.
SREENIVASAN: And that's
the "NewsHour" for tonight.
On Friday, five golden rings!
Join us for a sing along of
the "Twelve Days of Christmas"
with members of the military
around the globe.
WOODRUFF: We won't be singing.
SREENIVASAN: No.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online, and again
right here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour", thank
you and good night.